# Returning-Patients-Predicted-Analysis-in-Healthcare-Industry

This report is commissioned by the Maryland Department of Health. The hospital’s emergency department plays a vital role in healthcare operations and serves as the front line of care for the injured and severely ill. The emergency department is often the only accessible source of providing 24-hour urgent treatment. Thus, it’s important to know the potential availability and make better room arrangement to avoid overcrowding. As a consulting team, we utilize patient information to predict whether a patient will return to a hospital within 30 days of being discharged. With return prediction information, hospital or emergency center could prepare in advance to meet further room requirements and make recommendations to alleviate overcrowding. Our project results on patient return prediction will offer operational decision support to the hospital to improve the work efficiency in the emergency department and the quality of healthcare services.

We explore the hospital data using a number of data mining methods. There are 27 variables in hospital dataset, with 1 target variable and 26 predictors. In exploratory data analysis phase, we first performed some preprocessing on the dataset, such as handling missing values, combining multiple levels of categorical variables, removing current variables, creating new variables, as well as scaling variables and creating dummy variables for particular models to avoid potential errors in modeling phase. Also, we explore the potential relationships among variables using clustering and visualize the possible relationships among predictors.

In modeling stage, we utilize a number of the classification analysis methods to predict whether a patient will return to a hospital within 30 days of being discharged. We choose accuracy as the performance evaluation method for comparison among models and we also pay attention to True Positive Rate because we think the patients who will return are more important for hospital to figure out and manager of the emergency center would like to predict all patients who will return accurately. The ultimate goal is to demonstrate a classification prediction model that can be used on future patients to predict whether or not we expect them to return with a high accuracy.

Since our goal is for prediction, we will focus on model prediction power instead of inference power. We could get some sense that some variables, such as the primary method of payment the patient used and what happened to the patient after leaving the emergency room, are important to predict target variable from the result of models. In addition, bagging method with trees gives us the highest accuracy in our testing set, which is 78.05%.

From this analysis, emergency department could use our analysis report to predict the returning patients based on the patients information in hospital database. After knowing how many patients would return within 1 month of being discharged, emergency department could be more prepared in advance for the upcoming patients by allocating resource according to needs. Emergency center could even know which patients would return. Knowing this information, emergency center could send appointment request reminder or message to those potentially returning patients and it would decrease the variance of patient arrival rate, improving operation efficiency in emergency department.
